## Ocean Color

**About the Indicator**  
Ocean color measures chlorophyll-a concentration near the ocean’s
surface, which provides information on phytoplankton abundance.
Chlorophyll-a is one of the most directly observable measures we have
for tracking increasing ocean productivity.

**Status of the Indicator**  
Annual mean chlorophyll concentration was 0.079 mg chl m<sup>-3</sup> in
2023. Monthly mean chlorophyll concentrations ranged from 0.068–0.1 mg
chl m<sup>-3</sup>, which was within the range of values observed during
the previous years of the time series (0.057–0.12 mg chl
m<sup>-3</sup>). Over the period of record, annual Chl-A has shown weak
but significant linear decrease at a rate of 2.46^{-4} mg chl
m<sup>-3</sup> yr<sup>-1</sup>, and chlorophyll anomalies have declined
by 0.007 mg chl m<sup>-3</sup>. Chlorophyll concentrations were below
average across the Main Hawaiian Islands.

**Indicator Data**  
Description: Chlorophyll-a concentration from 1998-2024, derived from
the European Space Agency (ESA) Climate Change Initiative (CCI) dataset,
v6.0 (Sathyendranath et al. 2018). A monthly climatology was generated
across the entire period to provide an anomaly time series. An annual
anomaly was generated in reference to the 1998-2009 climatology to
provide a 2023 spatial anomaly.

ESA Ocean Color Climate Change Initiative dataset is a merged dataset,
combining data from SeaWIFS, MODIS-Aqua, MERIS, and VIIRS to provide a
homogeneous time-series of ocean color. Data was accessed from the
OceanWatch Central Pacific portal.

Timeframe: Monthly

Region/Location: Main Hawaiian Island Grid (18.5° – 22.5°N, 161° –
154°W).

Measurement Platform: Satellite

Data available at:
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/esa-cci-chla-monthly-v6-0>,
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/esa-cci-chla-1998-2009-clim-v6-0>,
and
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/esa-cci-chla-2023-clim_v6-0>.

Sourced from: NOAA OceanWatch (2024b) and Sathyendranath et al. (2018).
Graphics produced in part using Stawitz (2023).

**References**  
NOAA OceanWatch (2024b):
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/esa-cci-chla-monthly-v6-0>
Accessed: 4 April 2024 & 3 May 2024.

Sathyendranath et al. (2018): Sathyendranath S, Grant M, Brewin R.J.W,
Brockmann C, Brotas V, Chuprin A, Doerffer R, Dowell M, Farman A, Groom
S, Jackson T, Krasemann H, Lavender S, Martinez Vicente V, Mazeran C,
Mélin F, Moore TS, Müller D, Platt T, Regner P, Roy S, Steinmetz F,
Swinton J, Valente A, Zühlke M, Antoine D, Arnone R, Balch W.M, Barker
K, Barlow R, Bélanger S, Berthon J-F, Beşiktepe Ş, Brando VE, Canuti E,
Chavez F, Claustre H, Crout R, Feldman G, Franz B, Frouin R, García-Soto
C, Gibb SW, Gould R, Hooker S, Kahru M, Klein H, Kratzer S, Loisel H,
McKee D, Mitchell BG, Moisan T, Muller-Karger F, O’Dowd L, Ondrusek M,
Poulton AJ, Repecaud M, Smyth T, Sosik H.M, Taberner M, Twardowski M,
Voss K, Werdell J, Wernand M, Zibordi G. (2018): ESA Ocean Colour
Climate Change Initiative (Ocean\_Colour\_cci): Version 3.1 Data. Centre
for Environmental Data Analysis 04 July 2018.
<doi:10.5285/9c334fbe6d424a708cf3c4cf0c6a53f5>.
<http://dx.doi.org/10.5285/9c334fbe6d424a708cf3c4cf0c6a53f5>

Stawitz C (2023): nmfspalette: A Color Palette for NOAA Fisheries. R
package version 3.0.0.000.
<https://nmfs-fish-tools.github.io/nmfspalette/>
