## Rainfall

**About the Indicator**  
Rainfall may have substantive effects on the nearshore environment and
is a potentially important co-variate with the landings of particular
stocks.

**Status of the Indicator**  
The rainfall over the Main Hawaiian Islands was 1.72 mm day<sup>-1</sup>
in 2023. Monthly rainfall ranged from 0.386–5.24 mm day<sup>-1</sup>
during the year, within the range of values observed over the period of
record (0.241–7.53 mm day<sup>-1</sup>). Over the period of record,
there has been weakly significant decline of 2.95^{-4} mm
day<sup>-1</sup> yr<sup>-1</sup> in rainfall. Over the time series,
rainfall has declined by 0.013 mm day<sup>-1</sup>. The monthly anomaly
has declined by 0.019 mm day<sup>-1</sup>. Average rainfall was below
average in the Main Hawaiian Islands domain.

**Indicator Data**  
Description: The CPC Merged Analysis of Precipitation (CMAP) is a
technique which produces pentad and monthly analyses of global
precipitation in which observations from rain gauges are merged with
precipitation estimates from several satellite-based algorithms, such as
infrared and microwave (NOAA 2002). The analyses are on a 2.5 x
2.5-degree latitude/longitude grid and extend back to 1979. CMAP
Precipitation data are provided by the NOAA/OAR/ESRL PSD, Boulder,
Colorado, USA, from their website at <https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/psd/>.
The data are comparable (but should not be confused with) similarly
combined analyses by the Global Precipitation Climatology Project
described in Huffman et al. (1997). It is important to note that the
input data sources to make these analyses are not constant throughout
the period of record. For example, SSM/I (passive microwave - scattering
and emission) data became available in July 1987; prior to that the only
microwave-derived estimates available are from the MSU algorithm
(Spencer, 1993) which is emission-based thus precipitation estimates are
available only over oceanic areas. Furthermore, high temporal resolution
IR data from geostationary satellites (every 3-hr) became available
during 1986; prior to that, estimates from the OPI technique (Xie and
Arkin 1997) are used based on OLR from orbiting satellites. The merging
technique is thoroughly described in Xie and Arkin (1997). Briefly, the
methodology is a two-step process. First, the random error is reduced by
linearly combining the satellite estimates using the maximum likelihood
method, in which case the linear combination coefficients are inversely
proportional to the square of the local random error of the individual
data sources. Over global land areas the random error is defined for
each time period and grid location by comparing the data source with the
rain gauge analysis over the surrounding area. Over oceans, the random
error is defined by comparing the data sources with the rain gauge
observations over the Pacific atolls. Bias is reduced when the data
sources are blended in the second step using the blending technique of
Reynolds (1988).

Timeframe: Monthly

Region: Main Hawaiian Island Grid (18.5° – 22.5°N, 161° – 154°W)

Measurement Platform: In-situ station gauges and satellite data.

Data available at:
<http://apdrc.soest.hawaii.edu/erddap/griddap/hawaii_soest_bb7b_ce6a_f808.graph>.

Sourced from: NOAA ESRL (2024).

**References**  
NOAA ESRL (2024):
<http://apdrc.soest.hawaii.edu/erddap/griddap/hawaii_soest_bb7b_ce6a_f808.graph>
Accessed: 4 April 2024.

Xie, P., and P.A. Arkin (1997): Global precipitation: A 17-year monthly
analysis based on gauge observations, satellite estimates, and numerical
model outputs. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 78, 2539 -
2558.<https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/bams/78/11/1520-0477_1997_078_2539_gpayma_2_0_co_2.xml>

nmfspalette: Stawitz C (2023): nmfspalette: A Color Palette for NOAA
Fisheries. R package version 3.0.0.000.
<https://nmfs-fish-tools.github.io/nmfspalette/>
