## Sea Surface Temperature

**About the Indicator**  
Sea surface temperature (SST) is one of the most directly observable
existing measures for tracking increasing ocean temperatures. SST varies
in response to natural climate cycles such as the El Niño – Southern
Oscillation (ENSO). Both short-term variability and long-term trends in
SST impact the marine ecosystem. Understanding the mechanisms through
which organisms are impacted and the time scales of these impacts is an
area of active research.

**Status of the Indicator**  
Annual mean SST was 25.7 ºC in 2024. Over the period of record, SST has
increased by 0.6 ºC and the monthly SST anomaly increased by 0.6 ºC,
both at a rate of roughly 0.016 ºC yr<sup>-1</sup>. Monthly SST values
in 2024 ranged from 24.1–27.1 ºC, within the range of temperatures
experienced over the past several decades (23.3–28.5 ºC). Overall, SST
was hotter than the long-term average across most of the Main Hawaiian
islands in 2024, with some intensification in the northeast part of the
region.

**Indicator Data**  
Description: Satellite remotely sensed monthly sea surface temperature
(SST) is averaged across the the Main Hawaiian Island Grid (18.5° –
22.5°N, 161° – 154°W). A time series of monthly mean SST averaged over
the Main Hawaiian Island region is presented. Additionally, spatial
climatology and anomalies are shown. CoralTemp data are used to
calculate this indicator.

Timeframe: Monthly.

Region/Location: Main Hawaiian Island Grid (18.5° – 22.5°N, 161° –
154°W).

Measurement Platform: Satellite.

Data available at:
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/CRW_sst_v3_1_monthly>,
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/CRW_sst_v3_1_1985-2009-clim>,
and
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/CRW_sst_v3_1_2024-clim>.

Sourced from: NOAA OceanWatch (2024a). Graphics produced in part using
Stawitz (2023).

**References**  
NOAA OceanWatch (2024a):
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/CRW_sst_v3_1_monthly>
Accessed: 31 March 2025.

Stawitz C (2023): nmfspalette: A Color Palette for NOAA Fisheries. R
package version 3.0.0.000.
<https://nmfs-fish-tools.github.io/nmfspalette/>
